Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Christina Bio. She is
research program manager at Arizona State University co-founder and
co-director at the Arizona Cancer Evolution Center, a CE
Scholars program and co-founder and co-director of the co-operation
Scholars Program. Her research interests include mentoring in higher
education, both undergraduate and graduate students, technology and higher
education barriers to student success such as food and
housing insecurity and other topics. But these are the
ones we're going to focus on today. So, Doctor
Bachi, welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure
to everyone.
Hi, Ricardo. Thank you so much for having me.
It's a big pleasure to be here with you
today.
So, uh talking about the work uh you're doing
on e mentoring. So could you tell us first
what kinds of mentoring FF mentoring fall under the
rubric of e mentoring? I mean, what kinds of
practices and technologies are we talking about here?
Yeah, absolutely. Um So, e mentoring is just a
word that people use sometimes to refer to uh
practicing mentoring with the use of various technologies, right?
We can um also find it under various other
names um such as um um you know, um
online ment, mentoring, virtual mentoring, tele mentoring, cyber, mentoring,
so on and so forth. Um And basically, what
it means is just refers um to um um
to using various computer um mediated um programs to
um ensure interactions between say, usually two people. Traditionally,
according to the traditional mentoring definitions, it would be
uh perhaps a more experienced person who interacts with
the less experienced person who wants to learn something
um to advance to advance their goals in some,
in some way. Um And so a mentor um
really helps support the mentee by providing them with
learning, advising, encouraging. Um AND modeling that is often,
I think particularly in the online environment, uh boundary
list and hopefully egalitarian too. Um And so with
that, there are all kinds of um various e
mentoring opportunities these days. So for example, we could
see um 1 to 1 e mentoring where, you
know, two people interact online using various technologies or
platforms to build their e mentoring relationship. Um And,
and nurture it that way. Uh We could also
see group in mentoring opportunities where more people come
together to interact, to learn from each other, maybe
to create community around some shared interests um and
um and grow their relationship that way. Um We
could see peer e mentoring where people who belong
to a certain group um are matched by um
some characteristics or interests or goals or knowledge uh
to come together and help each other. Um So
th those are just a few examples of uh
of how that could work.
And of course you work in academia and uh
your work seems to be focused mostly on e
mentoring, e mentoring, applied to academia. But uh I
would imagine that it applies to a variety of
contexts, right? And do you study e mentoring only
uh in academia or also in those other contexts?
That's an excellent question. I do wanna study it
more broadly, but I haven't really done any work
as of right now outside of academia. Um But,
you know, I think you can, one of the
really great advantages of e mentoring is that you
can take it and apply it to virtually probably
any context, right? Uh We certainly see a lot
of it happening in academia or in education more
broadly speaking, it can apply to, you know, say
primary secondary schools, to high schools, to college students,
of course, to graduate students, um so on and
so forth. Um But I think it can also
be applied and it is applied um uh broadly
speaking in the corporate world where companies use it
for all sorts of employee on boarding procedures, maybe
or as part of employee training and professional development
opportunities um and so on and so forth. Um
I think it can also be, be used in
the nonprofits, right? Um IN healthcare, in, in literally
probably anything that we could think of any field
or industry could um could use a mentoring to
maybe help their people broadly speaking, um form a
better connections, build community and just enable them to
learn from each other and grow together.
And how long has the mentoring been applied to
the academic context? I mean, how, how old is
uh are, are e mentoring practices within academy?
Mhm That's an excellent question. Um Not that old
actually um because it relies on the use of
various technologies, right? So e mentoring evolved along with
uh various technologies such as internet and, and email,
for example. And so um I think e mentoring
started to be used as a tool in higher
education, for example, in about the 19 nineties um
where I think the first online courses started to
um to appear. And when that happened, professors used
e mentoring as a tool to kind of make
sure that their students are supported and get what
they need in order to be able to be
successful in their online courses. Um THEN fast forward
over the years. Um IN the two thousands, it
al also continue to evolve, right? But particularly after
2010 15, again, the more technology developed and the
more people in academia, right, the more students got
access to online education um and, and the more
universities started to offer various online degrees um than
a kind of kept up the pace with that
growth um and was used more and more by
universities and by professors to make sure that that
the students in these online courses and programs are
successful. Um And even though this happened, and even
though e mentoring definitely grew over the years, right,
it's debatable whether or not research really has kept
up with that and with really, you know, examining
abroad, um a variety of factors that might say
influence the success of e mentoring relationships.
So we're going to get into some of the,
the details surrounding this. But does the online environment
change how teaching and learning uh is done and
occurs?
Great question. Um I, I think it does, right?
Um And I think it does for the better
for quite some time, there was a debate there
on whether or not, you know, online learning is
a thing that students can engage in successfully. Is
it as valuable as a degree one would get
in person, you know, does it carry weight with
employers? All these questions were um were um at
people's um four minds for a while, right? And
maybe there still are in some context, but I
think the COVID-19 pandemic has largely influenced how people
perceive online learning. Um And we definitely see now
many, many more offerings for online programs and you
know, college degrees, graduate degrees, you name it. Universities
probably have it if people are interested in them,
right? Um But to come back to your questions,
I I think definitely the online context does change
or maybe influence a little bit teaching and learning
in the sense that um for one, for example,
it provides increased access to education broadly speaking. So
with the with online learning evolving over the years
and all of these programs and degrees being available
all over the side, people who did not, could
not access education before, perhaps due to, you know,
say time constraints, maybe they have a full time
job that they have to work on or um
family responsibilities, they might be caregivers, they might have
dependents, Children to take care of, they couldn't go
to, to enroll in an in person degree, right?
Because they simply could, didn't have the time and
maybe resources to do so. Um But with online
education now they can do all those things on
their own terms on their own time. Um ONLINE
um teaching and learning is also great in that,
that it offers flexibility. Um Arguably both for learners
and for uh professors too, right? Um There is
a little bit more, more of a flexible environment
in terms of interactions. Um For students, for example,
they can choose when to go in and watch
the videos or complete the assignments uh based on,
on their own availability, so on and so forth.
Um I think it's also maybe important to mention
that um people, well, there is a debate actually
if people have different learning styles, uh we're not.
But, but for sure, I think we can say
that people might have different learning preferences. So, you
know, some people might prefer to watch a video
to learn about a concept or to hear somebody
talking about that concept, right? Or um to um
engage in various discussions with other um students, right?
To, to get a different opinion and whatnot. And
so online learning also pulls in all these different
threads um and brings them together so that students
get a bit, a little bit of a well
rounded experience in terms of their learning preferences and
understanding of the various topics. Um
Yeah. No, go ahead, go ahead.
I was gonna say that, you know what I've
been saying so far, it sounds really positive and
great and it is, right? But I think it's
also important to acknowledge that there might be some
things that are not necessarily as positive and as
great. Um And one of those things would be,
for example, um the digital divide, which is still
very much a thing in the sense that not
everybody has equal access to um internet and to
various technologies. And so yes, on one hand there,
we see an increased access to education, right? But
on the other hand, there are still people who
cannot access it because there is just not um
there is just not uh they don't have access
to the technology, they would need it to be
successful in the first place. Um Some people also
might prefer the face to face interaction with their
professors, right? And some people might feel like it's
easier to build a relationship with their professor if
they go to classes twice a week or once
a week. Right. And you get to, to talk
to somebody in, in uh in person um as
opposed to doing it online. Um And then, you
know, like we were talking um before we started
to record, sometimes you might encounter technology issues. Um
And you know, you might need to join a
call for class, but your internet provider uh or
connection is down for the day. So, so you
can't do that. So, you know, I just wanted
to say that there are a lot of places
and there are also some things that can be
issues. Sometimes that we might need to be mindful
of
and to teachers and professors themselves have to adapt
the way they teach in online environments. I mean,
and I'm here, I'm not talking specifically about, for
example, back in 2020 when COVID hit uh at
a certain point, I mean, I noticed this because
uh since I am in regular contact with academics,
I had to reschedule a few interviews because people
were extremely busy moving materials online and adapting to
new technologies like Zoom, for example. Uh uh But
I'm not talking about that uh adaptation and moving
materials online and that kind of thing, I'm talking
more about the way they transmit information, the way
they teach, does it change in online environments?
Excellent question. Um I think it does to some
extent, right? Um So I guess for example, one
thing that comes to mind is that when we
teach online, we gotta make sure that we design
online friendly material for students to engage with. Right?
And so what does that mean? That means that
if we assign, you know, a really long piece
of material, audio video, whatever to a student to
listen or watch, they might or might not do
it. I think it depends from a student to
another in their preferences. But in general, there is,
you know, research out there on how, you know,
cognitive overload and you know, our attention spans are
not getting longer but shorter, right? And so with
those kinds of things in mind, I think it's
important to uh maybe, you know, create um shorter,
more digestible content for students to engage with um
using a variety of multimedia and various online tools
that keep students engaged and active with the material.
Um And I think this is particularly important because
because motivation and showing up every day to do
online work is a big factor in the success
of online learning, right? And, and, and I feel
like if students don't have fun, engaging things to
come to every single time they, then they might
not be as motivated to do those things to
come back to engage, to do well in the
course. Um Let's see, what else? Um I think,
I think, um I think that communicating and, and
building community is also really important um in online
learning. And what I mean by that is um
you know, maintaining regular communication with students, um creating
the of presence of, we're here together, we're here
to learn, we're uh you know, we, we can
do pretty much a lot of the things that
we can do in person, I think, right? Like
learn from each other, listen to each other's stories
and inputs and insights, right? Um GROW together, um
create opportunities for feedback and for discussion. Um THOSE
things, those kinds of things are really important. Um
I believe for educators to do in order to
create an effective um online learning environment.
So I would like to ask you now if
we know what predicts the success of e mentoring,
I mean, does it depend for example, on any
specific individual traits of students?
That's a great question. Um There, particularly after the
COVID-19 pandemic, but even before there were, there were
studies out there looking to understand, you know, what
exactly the factors or traits of students might be
um that would predict the success of a knee
mentoring relationship. And so, um I can get to
that in a second in terms of my own
work. But before I do that, just in general,
um there are, you know, some, some things in
the literature, like um a commitment, you know, students
commitment um to um to mentoring to their own
goals, right? Might influence the ways in which they
show up and engage in that particular mentoring relationship.
Um Communication is also very, very important. You cannot
have a successful mentoring relationship if you're not there
to communicate effectively and timely with your mentor, right?
Um And so are clear goals and expectations. So
it's really important that everybody, you know, both the
mentor and the mentee really knows what the goals
and expectations are so that they're able to um
to build backwards almost from there, right? So the
mentor or probably any mentor actually who engages in
a, in a mentoring relationship will initially have a
conversation with their mentee where they really get to,
you know, the people get to know each other.
Um And the mentor really asks the mentee about
their goals um and, and future plans, right? And
then with that in, find the mentors job for
the most part is to kinda like backtrack and
see how can they help the mentee get to
this distant point or more distant point in time
to accomplish their goals. Um They established a set
of steps maybe um that they can work on
together so that the mentee can get there. Um
Another thing that we see is important in the
literature is cultural and emotional intelligence. So it's important
for people to, you know, to be able to
be aware, we're all different people, we all coming
from different backgrounds. And so I think it's important
to have an awareness and appreciation for that so
that we can really, you know, um have rich
conversations and, and learn from each other. Um And
then, you know, there is like other more technical
uh the things like the mentors, skills and knowledge,
like you would have to make sure that a
mentor, you know, is, is, is appropriate that the
pairing I should say is appropriate because not every
mentor is gonna be good for every mentee and
the other way around, people need to have some
things in common. Um Right, in order to ensure
that they have um a, a mutually beneficial mentoring
relationship.
Uh And so I, I, in what ways do
perceptions that students have of particular aspects of e
mentoring matter here? So, for example, uh role modeling
and psychological and emotional support. And I would imagine
when it comes to role modeling, uh specifically having
uh mentors who are of the same gender, for
example. So, uh how does that work?
Yeah, that's an excellent question. So, um in, in
my dissertation work, um I looked to um understand
how online students um it perceive and engage with
e mentoring. Um And so, in doing so, um
um I examined a couple of different factors or
traits um of students such as gender, age, digital
competence, um social self efficacy and goal orientation. And
I looked specifically at seeing how these things map
onto um students perceptions of psychological and emotional support,
um degree and career support, academic knowledge support and
role modeling that you just mentioned. And so all
these things, psychological and emotional support, degree and career
support, academic knowledge support and role modeling are part
of um of um um somebody else's research. Um
uh Her name is Doctor Gloria Crisp. And she
created this um thing that she calls the co
college student mentoring scale. Um That was I think
first published in about 2009 or so. Um And
so that's a widely used scale in mentoring to
try to understand how various traits again, influenced, say
in our case, students perceptions of all these different
areas of e mentoring, right? Um And so with
role modeling, you, like you were asking um in
my own work, I have to like browse through
my brain really quickly uh in my own work,
I found that um when it comes to role
modeling in particular age and gender, do not really
um inf influence play any role, right? Um INTO
it. But, but digital competence, goal orientation and social
self efficacy do. Um SO, in fact, if I
remember correctly, I think social self efficacy only influenced
students perceptions of role modeling and not their and,
and did not um influence their perceptions of psychological
and emotional support, degree and career support and academic
knowledge support. Um And, you know, that may be
the case because um say students who have higher
levels of social self efficacy um are maybe, you
know, more inclined to um to look up to
their mentors, to interact, more with them, to want
to be more like them if that makes sense,
right? Um And to be more receptive um um
in that relationship.
Uh And what about uh future engagement with e
mentoring opportunities? So, if people have already engaged with
uh e mentoring, uh what predicts if they in
the future will do it again? Uh I mean,
if they were satisfied with enough with the experience
and they will and will want to have it
or try it again.
Mhm Yeah. So um again, in, in my work,
um um I did not see contrary to expectations
and to what previous research indicates I did not
find that age or gender had any influence on
um online students um likelihood to engage with future
e mentoring opportunities. Be they formal or informal? Uh
By the way, we looked at both these things
to see whether there would be a difference in
terms of um formal versus informal um e mentoring
programs. And there was not um however, digital competence
and goal orientation were the most significant predictors of
students um interest to potentially engage in both formal
and informal mentoring opportunities in the future. And that's
no big surprise, right? Um When we say digital
competence, by the way, we mean just a student
skills to um to effectively gather information, online, engage
with all these different um technologies um excuse me,
um and, and be able to use them effectively,
right? Um And on a side note, because particularly
with younger students, we have, you know, been growing
up through all these technology developments, sometimes in higher
education, we tend to assume that these students who
are also known as the digital natives would be
absolutely comfortable um with all these tools. And, you
know, we assume that they are say, for example,
highly skilled in things like digital competence, but sometimes
that's not the best assumption to make because, you
know, just because somebody grew up with these tools
does not necessarily mean that they know how to
use every technology effectively or how to bring them
all together and so on and so forth, right?
So I think it's important to, you know, just
to throw a little caution uh there and, and
make sure that, you know, maybe we conduct assessments,
um if we have say e mentoring programs, right,
to kinda see where the students are at, um
where the professors are at because they're not no
exception either, you know, sometimes the professors are also
assumed to be really digitally competent and perhaps that's
not necessarily the case um since there are so
many tools out there and we cannot possibly know
every single one of them. Right.
Yeah. And also I would imagine that even for
the younger people who have been exposed to these
newer technologies for a longer period of time, I
mean, since new ones are coming around all the
time, uh perhaps we also shouldn't assume that they
are familiar with all of them because that's, I
would imagine virtually impossible.
Absolutely. Yes. And then remember we talked about the
digital divide a few moments ago. So that's a
whole other thing. And, you know, particularly for students
coming from rural, rural, that's a hard word to
pronounce rural environments. Um WHO did not necessarily not
even have access to all these technologies as they
were growing up or the internet connection, right? Um
JU uh just assuming that they would be digitally
competent would be a huge, huge mistake and lost
opportunity. And actually, you know, us helping them get
to the point where they are comfortable using um
using all these tools successfully.
So I think we've been sort of alluding to
this throughout the interview, but just perhaps to sum
things up a little bit, what would you say
are some of the advantages and disadvantages of e
mentoring compared to some more traditional forms of mentoring?
Hm, that is an excellent question. Um And one
of my favorites when I talk about e mentoring
actually. So, um yeah, we alluded to these things
a little bit. But I think, you know, in
terms of advantages, um one of um one of
the biggest advantages I think um from um e
mentoring um a awarding this really huge geographic flexibility.
So with traditional mentoring relationships, often time times people
would be um uh location bound, right? You had
to be at the same school, you had to
be at the same company, you had to be
in the same location. But with e mentoring, virtually,
you can, you know, reach as far as you
want, right? And find the people you would want
to connect with um no matter where they are
in the world um and reach out to them
and, you know, kinda kinda see what happens, right.
Mhm. Um So that's huge and that, that's also
really, really important because um it um it brings
up new opportunities for people who maybe would not
have had such opportunities before. So, for example, again,
going back to online students, for example, um who,
you know, maybe are full time workers and parents
and all these things, um it's unlikely that they
could have, you know, had in-person mentors. But again,
with e mentoring now they can engage with people
and, and build these connections um which can come
with really, really great benefits. So, you know, for
example, for women, um and people who are coming
from um traditionally underrepresented backgrounds, um E mentoring is
really, really important because it can help them, you
know, be more connected. Um THEY have a broader
network which will maybe lead to more opportunities. Um
It can shape their interest in graduate school and
various careers that they would not, that maybe have
thought of otherwise because, you know, somebody like me
does not necessarily go there because I did not
have a role model, right? And I didn't know
that that's possible for me. So we see that
we have countless examples throughout um the mentoring, the
e mentoring programs um that I'm involved with, for
example, um Then another big advantage I think comes
from um from the flexibility, kinda hinted to this
already from the flexibility that people have, you know,
we can work around our schedules, we can find
a time that works for everybody, right? Um And
we can make this um this relationship happen. Um
Maybe it's also important to mention that with e
mentoring, um we can keep track of conversations, maybe
document conversations, right? So if, if our meeting today
say was um uh was an e mentoring meeting,
then we could record it and, and you know,
me as the mentee, I could then go and
look at the recording transcript on my own later
on. If I wanted to reference something to remember
something, you know, to go do some research on
some resources, maybe reference so on and so forth,
right? So it would be easier from that point
of view too. Um Then in terms of um
of disadvantages, um like I mentioned before, some people
might feel a lack of personal connection with e
mentoring. Um BECAUSE, you know, for various reasons, some
people might prefer to meet in person, some people
might feel like it's more difficult to, to really
build genuine relationships online, right? Um And they might
really be feeling like they miss on those personal
interactions, um technical difficulties, right? We mentioned that already
those can happen too and they are no fun.
Um There could be some privacy concerns in terms
of, you know, data sharing and stuff with various
software recording, you know, people's email addresses and, and,
and phone numbers and whatnot. But, you know, I
would argue that these are no different than, you
know, the information that's being collected when you sign
up for, you know, a new grocery store newsletter
or whatever, right? Something that you would do maybe
anyways. Um AND then, um I guess sometimes there
can be this a little bit of a disconnection
in terms of delayed responses. So if we communicate
via email, for example, you know, the conversation does
not quite happen in real time. Um There is
a little bit of a delay between uh what
I send what I receive, you know, um A
and maybe, maybe that's problematic for some people. Um
But again, I, for me personally, I feel like
these things are can be easily or somewhat, at
least easily addressed. Um And I think that the
advantages um are far, far um beyond the disadvantages
for a mentoring.
Uh By the way earlier, uh you've already mentioned,
you've mentioned uh COVID-19. Uh So what impact did
the pandemic have on e mentoring and out with
this study,
it had a great impact um like you did
on, on online education really. But, but with e
mentoring too, um you know, I started my doctoral
program in May of 2020 when, when the pandemic
uh was very much a thing, right? Um And
I finished my doctoral program throughout the pandemic. And
I think I only went to school in person
maybe like three times. Um Otherwise all of my
classes are online, all of my meetings with my
colleagues, with my advisors, everything. Um And it was
great, I loved it, it worked really well for
me. Um But at the same time, I had
decided that I really early on in 2020 that
I will focus my dissertation on e mentoring. So
I kept a really close eye on how the
field was developing, right? Um And so, so I've
seen a lot of great papers come out throughout
the pandemic. Um And, and many of them really
focused on understanding um how the pandemic is impacting
students and e mentoring, you know, are they are
students more likely to engage in e mentoring that
they would have been before? Absolutely, yes. Um Are
they drawing benefits from being engaged in e mentoring
during the pandemic. Absolutely yes. Again and so some
of those benefits would be things like, you know,
there has been papers who um who uh were
authors who have found that students who were engaged
in e mentoring relationships during the pandemic reported significantly
less anxiety and depression, for example. And compared to
people who are not engaged in e mentoring and
overall just better, just better mental health. Um They
felt um they were, they indicated um that they
felt higher rates of belonging and inclusiveness, which is
really important, particularly during the pandemic when you know,
everybody's world was kind of shattered and rearranged in
some way, right? Um And just like before, um
before the pandemic, pretty much, you know, the results
were consistent um showing that students were engaged in
e mentoring, had overall better grades, better GPA S
um better access to various network um um opportunities
um a larger social capital. So they knew more
people that they could uh go to when they
needed help um and so on and so forth.
So, so yes, the pandemic really influenced how much
people were actually focusing on e mentoring, both as
a practice and as a field of study.
So do you think that the work you and
other people are doing on e mentoring, how it
works when it works with whom it works, et
cetera, it can help uh mentors and educators design
e mentoring opportunities.
I certainly hope so. Yeah, and I, I surely
hope so so. You know, one of the big
um I think from my perspective, there is like
two main messages that I would put out there,
right? One has to do with digital competence and
it's important for e mentoring and more broadly for
online learning. Um I think it's really, really important
to uh you know, to run assessments of digital
competence, both for students and for T teachers um
and professors and to really develop training um modules
and various other, you know, provide various other support
opportunities for them to help them um develop this
skill further and further. And I think that it's
not, there is not gonna be a point where
we're gonna say, OK, you have a lot of
digital competence and you can stop. Um I don't
think we're gonna get there because technology advances, like
we said, you know, so at, at such a
fast rate, right these days um that we, you
know, we have to keep learning and we have
to keep improving our skills um in order to
be effective teachers and learners and mentors and new
mentors and so on and so forth. Um And
another thing I wanna mention from my personal experience
um as the co-founder and co-director of the A
Scholars program um and the Corporation Scholars Program and
all the other mentoring programs we're running at A
SU um is that I think community is really
really important when it comes to e mentoring. So
building community and nurturing community with students is going
to be crucial for the success of any e
mentoring opportunity. And what I mean by community is
really nothing fancy, right? What I mean is just
creating this welcoming environment where students know that they
are appreciated for who they are, where we treat
students from an what we call in higher education,
an asset based perspective rather than a deficit perspective.
So in a deficit perspective, we say, oh, students
are not good at math. Um And therefore we're
gonna do this to fix it. Whereas in an
asset perspective, we say, oh you know, they're great
at multiplication. This is a silly example, right? So
we're gonna focus on that and building the skills
that they're good at to kind of like help
build everything and carry it on, right? Um So
in our own experience, we find that when we
encourage students to bring their whole selves to school,
right? In this case, and to work too, I
would argue and just create this environment where um
you know, it's uh warm and welcoming and really
appreciating of everybody's backgrounds and interests. Um THEN people
are more likely to engage, they start to share
various stories and experiences, they realize that they are
more alike than not, right? Um And this really
great thing happens where everybody learns from each other
and we grow together as a community of scholars
in this particular example.
So, uh that's about e mentoring. Uh I have
one last question slash topic I would like to
explore here. So I know you're also interested in
uh barriers to student success. So, uh what have
you studied in that regard? And which do you
think are some of the biggest barriers here?
Mhm. That's, that's an excellent question. Um And an
unfortunate topic that we have to be aware of
in higher education, I think. Um, IT was quite
a few years ago, maybe during my master's program.
So, so quite a few years ago when I
learned about this thing called basic needs insecurity, um
and basically means insecurity is an umbrella term that
basically, um, is composed of or refers to um
food insecurity, um housing insecurity, um and things of
that nature, right? That students um could experience that
will most definitely prevent them from being successful um,
in their educational endeavors, right? Um, THERE have been
quite a few researchers over the years who have
looked um at these things. Um, THERE, there is
this big group that's based um out of the
Temple University now. Um, IT'S called the Hope Center.
Um, AND they do a lot of work on
basic need and security and, um, you know, they
try to survey nationally representative samples across the United
States and for the past few years, they have
consistently found that as much as 45% of the
undergraduate student population um experienced some sort of food
insecurity at some point during their college experience. Um
And, and that's a huge problem because you cannot
learn and you cannot be successful in school when
you are hungry, right? Um And when you don't
know where your next meal might be coming from,
um, in the, in the same line of work,
they also looked at um students who are experiencing
housing insecurity and homelessness and they define these things,
they put them into two different categories, I think.
So, um housing insecurity is when um people have
temporary issues with housing. So they might, you know,
um go um crash on somebody's couch for two
weeks that would be housing insecurity or they have,
you know, um eight roommates uh within two bedrooms.
That's also not ideal, right? Um And homelessness, it's
quite obvious, you know, you, you don't, you just
don't have a place to live um for housing
insecurity again, a huge proportion of students up to
20% or so if I remember correctly, um reported
having experienced that at times and about 10% or
so of students reported experiencing uh homelessness um at
times while being in school. Um So those are
obviously really great issues that students are dealing with.
Um And you know, if the basic needs are
not covered then then people just cannot be successful
period in school work or otherwise. Um And so
over the years, we've seen an increase of universities
um and colleges across the country really, you know,
working to uh to start to address these issues.
So for example, um universities have built um and
are supporting um having pantries on campus where students
can go pick up some food every now and
then and just, you know, more in general, maybe
connect students with various resources that they need. Um
From here on in general, I would go and
say that there is just broadly speaking, a bunch
of uh financial constraints that students could experience that
could really impact their success um in higher education.
So, you know, with that again, um we know
that an ex an unexpected expense of um of
$500. No more, no less, right? I mean, maybe
less, maybe more. Um BUT just in average something
like $500 that comes out of nowhere that a
student needs to cover for a car uh repair
or something like that can really derail their education
because they might not be able to cover tuition.
And if you did not pay your full tuition
by the end of the semester, you will not
be able to enroll in classes for the next
semester. Now, you have a hold on your account,
then you have some more fees added on top
of that. Right. Then things can snowball really quickly.
And so with that universities have started to create
um these emergency funds, they call them where students
can apply for um for financial um aid um
to cover an emergency that they um had. Um
THOSE are, you know, great initiatives to help students
succeed. Um And probably we could, we could do
even better in terms of being more responsive and,
and helping students more timely with these kinds of
things and, you know, having really streamlined processes. So,
so that when a student applies to something like
um um an emergency financial aid type thing, they
don't have to wait a week or two weeks
to receive the money they needed right then and
there, right? So, so, so something a process that
that could go faster would probably be a little,
a little bit more ideal.
Uh AND do you think uh and this will
be my last question and uh do you think
that uh the trends when it comes to some
of these barriers you mentioned to uh success uh
in university and elsewhere? Uh THAT uh do you
think that trends there are positive or not?
I think they're positive. And I at the same
time, I think that there is a long way
to go too, right? Um A again, going back
to the basic needs and security example, we we
definitely seen lots of changes only over the past
five years or so with various programs in place,
universities really being more aware of this, really being
an issue, right? But before, like 10 years ago.
I don't know if, if we even knew that
that's a problem. Probably not. Um, SO now we
know that that's a problem and we work to
address it and that's, that's great. So, the trends
are positive. Um, AND at the same time, um,
you know, now that we tackled this big thing,
um, maybe we kinda have to wonder, you know,
what are other things that might be out there
that prevent students from being successful um And see
how um how we can help address them?
Great. So, uh just before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
when you work on the internet?
Thank you for asking that. Yeah, absolutely. So, um
I have a website where I try to centralize
a lot of my work. Um That is um
Christina batu.org. Um I'm also on Twitter and linkedin
and I should say that I'm really more than
happy to connect and talk to people. Um I,
I love just, you know, having conversations, exchanging ideas
and um and you know, see where that takes
us.
Great. So, uh thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show and
it was really good to talk to you.
Likewise. Thank you so much for having me, Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching the interview until
the end. Please do not forget to share the
video, subscribe to the channel and also leave a
like. And if you like what I'm doing, please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal. You
can find the links in the description box of
the interview. The show is brought to you by
N Lights learning and development. Done differently. Check their
website at N lights.com. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Burger Larson, Jerry Mueller and Frederick
Sunda Bernard. So Zola Jonathan Wieser Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitting Bed, Arno Wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric, Alania John
Connors Philip for Connolly, Robert Winde Ruin. Nai Zoup
Mars Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil Cavan and Michael
Stormer Samuel Andrea Francis for the Agns Alexander De
Bauer Fergal, Ken Hal Herzog, Jonathan Lat jeans and
Samuel K Eric Heinz Mark Smith, Js Friends, Davids
L Wilson Ya A room in Roach Diego, Janni
Punter A ro. Man B NCO bar bar, a
hunt Pao Stasi Alek Bach Guy, Madison, Gary G
Almansa Zal Adrian Golden pal was Julian Price Edward
Hall, Eden Bronner, Douglas Fry Franca, Portol Lotti Gabriel
Pans Cortez, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy Sunny Smith,
John Wan Martin Eland, Dr Bird, Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, mom, Maria Paul Giorgino Lke Lo A George
often Williamson, Peter Walla David Williams Ruth Towel Costa
Anton Erison, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw and Marie Martinez
Coralie Chevalier, Pedro Bonilla Ziegler, bungalow atheists, Larry de
Le Junior Old Herringbone, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Sperber,
Robert Grassy Tom Roth. The RP MD Igor and
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radix Mark Temple, Richard
Bowen Thomas Dauber, Luke Neeson, Chris Story and Manuel
Olivea. A special thanks to my producers is our
web, Jim Frank Luca Stefania, Tom Benem Bernard Dini
Ortiz Dixon Benedict Mueller Vege, Gdi Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and
Al Nick Ortiz. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian and Bogdan Knit. Thank you for
all.